
In computer networks, there are several types of delays that can occur during data transmission. Here are some common types of delays along with their definitions and numerical examples:

$$
1. Propagation Delay: ( T^{p} )
$$

   - **Definition**: Propagation delay is the time taken for a signal to travel from the sender to the receiver over the transmission medium.
   - **Numerical Example**: 
	   - If the speed of light in the medium is 200,000 km/s and the distance between sender and receiver is 1000 km, then the propagation delay would be 1000 km / 200,000 km/s = 5 milliseconds.

$$
2. Transmission Delay: ( T^{t} )
$$

   - **Definition**: Transmission delay is the time taken to push all the packet's bits into the link.
   - **Numerical Example**: 
	   - If the packet size is 8000 bits and the link's bandwidth is 2 Mbps (2,000,000 bits per second), then the transmission delay would be 8000 bits / 2,000,000 bits per second = 0.004 seconds = 4 milliseconds.
	   - If the packet size is *1kb (L)* and bandwidth is *1kbps(BW)*, then transmission delay will be equal to *(L / BW) = 1024 / 1000 = 1.024* . **NOTE**: For data, 1kb = 1024 Bits and for bandwidth, 1kb = 1000 bits. Refer to [[Specials]]

$$3. Processing Delay:$$

   - **Definition**: Processing delay is the time taken by the router to process the packet header and decide where to forward the packet.
   - **Numerical Example**: 
	   - If the processing delay of a router is 2 milliseconds, then it would take 2 milliseconds to process each packet.

$$4. Queueing Delay:$$

   - **Definition**: Queueing delay is the time a packet spends in a queue waiting to be transmitted.
   - **Numerical Example**: 
	   - If a packet arrives at a router when the link is busy, it will have to wait in a queue. If the queueing delay is 5 milliseconds, then the packet will have to wait 5 milliseconds before being transmitted.

$$5. Jitter:$$

   - **Definition**: Jitter is the variation in delay of received packets.
   - **Numerical Example**: 
	   - If a series of packets are sent with an average delay of 10 milliseconds and the delay of individual packets varies between 8 to 12 milliseconds, then the jitter would be 2 milliseconds.

These are some of the common types of delays in computer networks along with their definitions and numerical examples.

---

## Numericals 

1. There is a switch in a network. Every packet goes through two links, one from source o switch and from switch to destination. There is 10000 bits size of data, divided into two packets of each having a size of 5000 bits. Transmission time for each packet is 5000 / 10^7 bits/second. Each link has a propagation delay of 20 microsecond. The switch begins forwarding a packet after 35 microsecond after receiving. What is the time elapsed between transmission of 1st bit of first data packet and the reception of last bit of 2nd data packet in microseconds ? ==( GATE 2015 )==

	a. 1075
	b. 1575
	c. 2220
	d. 2200

	**Solution** -

	- Packet size = 5000 bits
	- Propagation delay = 20 ms
	- Switch Delay = 35 ms
	- Transmission time / Packet = 5000 / 10^7 bits/s = 5000 / 10^7 * 10^6 ms = 500ms
	
	So, 
	
	- Step 1: The first packet completely reaches to the switch in 500 + 20 = 520 ms
	- Step 2: By 500 ms, source starts transmitting 2nd packet, as the last bit of 1st packet was already on link.
	- Step 3: After 35 ms ; 520 + 35 = 555 ms, The switch starts transmitting 1st packet.
	- Step 4: by the time of more 520 ms, the 2nd packet completely reaches the switch, 500 + 520 = 1020 ms.
	- Step 5: The last bit of first packet will be on the link after 500 ms, that is 555 + 500 = 1055 ms
	- Step 6: Now, after 35 ms the switch also starts transmitting 2nd packet. That is 1020 + 35 = 1055.
	- Step 7: So, as the 2nd packet transmission started at time 1055 ms, it will take 520 ms to reach to the destination completely. = 1055 + 520 = 1575 ms.
